Deadline: Friday, October 3, 2025 at 11:59PM PT

Program Overview
The U.S. Department of State’s Benjamin A. Gilman International Scholarship Program (Gilman Program) supports students of limited financial means to study or intern abroad, providing them with skills critical to our national security and economic prosperity. The Gilman Program is a competitive, merit-based scholarship. To be eligible for the Gilman Program, applicants must be receiving a Federal Pell Grant during the time of application or provide proof that they will be receiving a Pell Grant during the term of their study abroad program or internship. The Institute of International Education has administered the program since its inception in 2001.

Why Gilman?
The Gilman Program supports American students to gain proficiency in a variety of languages and cultures, skills that are critically important to their academic and career development.

The program encourages students to study or intern abroad in all world regions and from all U.S. states, academic fields, and types of institutions.  Almost 60% of all Gilman scholars come from small towns or rural communities across the United States.

In addition to the standard Gilman award, the Gilman Program offers limited supplemental funding opportunities for students who want to conduct STEM-related coursework or internships abroad as part of their study abroad or international internship program and students studying critical languages (those deemed important to national security).

Mission of the Gilman Program
Develop a generation of future American leaders with the career skills and international networks to advance U.S. national security and economic prosperity.
Support young Americans to gain the professional skills, language abilities, and knowledge of the world needed for successful careers.
Expand the destinations where U.S. students study and intern abroad, in order to build relationships, foster mutual understanding, and represent American culture and values, critical to national security.
Congressman Benjamin A. Gilman
This is a congressionally funded program of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs at the U.S. Department of State and named after the late congressman Benjamin A. Gilman (R-NY). With his support, the program was established by the International Academic Opportunity Act of 2000. Shortly thereafter in 2003, Congressman Gilman retired after serving in the House of Representatives for 30 years and chairing the Committee on International Relations.

Study abroad is a special experience for every student who participates. Living and learning in a vastly different environment of another nation not only exposes our students to alternate views, but also adds an enriching social and cultural experience. It also provides our students with the opportunity to return home with a deeper understanding of their place in the world, encouraging them to be a contributor, rather than a spectator in the international community.

Benjamin A. Gilman
Award Benefits
Nearly 3,000 scholarships of up to $5,000 will be awarded this academic year for U.S. citizen undergraduates to study or intern abroad.

Award Recipients
Award recipients are chosen by a competitive selection process and must use the award to defray eligible study or intern abroad costs. These costs include program tuition, room and board, books, local transportation, insurance, international airfare, passport and visa fees. For more information, please check Eligible & Non-Eligible Expenses.

noncompetitive eligibility (NCE) for Federal employment
Gilman scholars are eligible for 12 months of noncompetitive eligibility (NCE) hiring status within the federal government, with the possibility of extensions if certain criteria are met. NCE allows U.S. federal government agencies to hire eligible exchange program alumni outside of the formal competitive job announcement process and to compete for certain federal employment jobs that are only open to federal employees. In other words, a Gilman alumna/us can receive a job offer with as little as an open position and a résumé that reflects the necessary experience and education for an agency.

Additional information is available through the following resources:

Gilman Noncompetitive Eligibility document
U.S. Department of State’s Exchange Alumni website
U.S. Department of State


The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs (ECA) designs and implements educational, professional, and cultural exchange and other programs that create and sustain the mutual understanding with other countries necessary to advancing United States foreign policy goals. ECA programs cultivate people-to-people ties among current and future global leaders that build enduring networks and personal relationships and promote U.S. national security and values.
